     TOROIID                             Decision Letter
Exhibition Place
Meeting No.: 18                                     Contact: Jennifer Lin, Committee Administrator
Meeting Date: Monday, September 22, 2025            Phone: 416-397-4592
Start Time: 9:30 AM                                 E-mail: epb@toronto.ca
Location: Exhibition Place, Automotive Bldg,        Chair: Deputy Mayor Ausma Malik
Room 204, 105 Princes' Blvd/Video Conference



EP18.9 - Soft Drink Sponsorship Agreement - Coca-Cola Canada
Decision Type: ACTION
Status: Adopted
Ward: 10 - Spadina - Fort York

Confidential Attachment - The attachment to this report contains financial information that
belongs to the Board of Governors of Exhibition Place and has monetary value or potential
monetary value.

Board Reccommendations
The Board of Governors of Exhibition Place:

1. Requests that City Council approve an agreement with Coca-Cola Canada Bottling Ltd ("Coke") for
a period of five years, commencing on the date of approval of City Council, to be the official and
exclusive soft drink provider to Exhibition Place, including Enercare Centre and Automotive Building,
on the terms and conditions set out in the revised report (September 18, 2025) from the Chief
Executive Officer, Exhibition Place and such other terms and conditions as may be satisfactory to the
Chief Executive Officer, Exhibition Place, and the City Solicitor.

2. Requests that City Council to direct that the confidential information contained in Confidential
Attachment 1 to the revised report (September 18, 2025) from the Chief Executive Officer, Exhibition
Place remain confidential and not be released publicly as it contains financial information that belongs
to the Board of Governors of Exhibition Place and has monetary value or potential monetary value.

Decision Advice and Other Information
3. Directed the Chief Executive Officer, Exhibition Place, subject to Council approval, to enter into an
agreement with Coca-Cola Canada Bottling Ltd ("Coke") for a period of five years, commencing on
the date of approval of City Council, to be the official and exclusive soft drink provider to Exhibition
Place, including Enercare Centre, and Automotive Building, on the terms and conditions set out in the
revised report (September 18, 2025) and such other terms and conditions as may be satisfactory to
the Chief Executive Officer, Exhibition Place and the City Solicitor.

4. Directed that the confidential information contained in Confidential Attachment 1 to the revised
report (September 18, 2025) from the Chief Executive Officer, Exhibition Place remain confidential
and not be released publicly as it contains financial information that belongs to the Board of
Governors of Exhibition Place and has monetary value or potential monetary value.

Origin
(September 18, 2025) Report from the Chief Executive Officer, Exhibition Place

Summary
At its meeting on September 22, 2025, the Board of Governors of Exhibition Place considered Item
EP18.9 and made recommendations to City Council.

Summary from the report (September 18, 2025) from the Chief Executive Officer, Exhibition
Place
This report recommends entering into a five-year agreement with Coca-Cola Canada Bottling Ltd.
(Coke) to be the official and exclusive soft drink provider to Enercare Centre and the Automotive
Building at Exhibition Place.

Exhibition Place Purchasing staff, on behalf of the Finance, Event Services and Sales and Marketing
Division, posted the Proposal Call Document #EXP2025-08 publicly on both Bonfire and Merx, and
notified three (3) potential proponents on July 25, 2025, which closed August 18, 2025.

This report recommends entering a five (5) year agreement with Coke.

Background Information
(September 18, 2025) Revised Report from the Chief Executive Officer, Exhibition Place on Soft
Drink Sponsorship Agreement - Coca-Cola Canada
(https://www.toronto.ca/legdocs/mmis/2025/ep/bgrd/backgroundfile-258606.pdf)
Appendix A - Coca-Cola Sustainability Program
(https://www.toronto.ca/legdocs/mmis/2025/ep/bgrd/backgroundfile-258321.pdf)
Confidential Attachment 1 - Financial Implications and Terms
(September 8, 2025) Report from the Chief Executive Officer, Exhibition Place on Soft Drink
Sponsorship Agreement - Coca-Cola Canada
