                                             REPORT FOR ACTION WITH
                                           CONFIDENTIAL ATTACHMENT


Multi-year Agreement with a Consumer Show Client
-C

Date: November 29, 2022
To: Board of Governors of Exhibition Place
From: Don Boyle, Chief Executive Officer
Wards: All


REASON FOR CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION

This report contains financial information, supplied in confidence to the Board, which, if
disclosed, could reasonably be expected to prejudice significantly the competitive
position or interfere significantly with the contractual or other negotiations of a person,
group of persons, or organization.


SUMMARY

This report recommends a multi-year agreement between a Consumer Show Client and
Exhibition Place within Enercare Centre.


RECOMMENDATIONS

The Chief Executive Officer recommends that:

1. The Board approve multi-year license agreements with the Consumer Show Client -
C for Enercare Centre, as set out in Confidential Attachment 1, for a 3-year term
commencing in each of 2023, 2024, and 2025 on the terms and conditions of the
Licence Agreement, and such other terms and conditions satisfactory to the Chief
Executive Officer and City Solicitor.

2. The Board direct that the confidential information contained in Confidential
Attachment 1 remain confidential as this report contains financial information, supplied
in confidence to the Board, which, if disclosed, could reasonably be expected to
prejudice significantly the competitive position or interfere significantly with the
contractual or other negotiations of a person, group of persons, or organization.

Multi-year Agreement with a Consumer Show Client - C                              Page 1 of 2
FINANCIAL IMPACT

The agreement recommended in this report provides financial revenues to the Board as
set out in Confidential Attachment 1.


DECISION HISTORY

The Exhibition Place Strategic Plan continues to have a Business Development Goal to
grow event activity especially at Enercare Centre and Beanfield Centre, and as a
strategy to support this goal to maintain strong relationships with existing clients or
events.


COMMENTS

The Consumer Show Client description is listed in Confidential Attachment 1.

The details of the agreement between Exhibition Place and the Consumer Show Client
are provided in Confidential Attachment 1.


CONTACT

Laura Purdy, General Manager, 416-263-3020, LPurdy@explace.on.ca


SIGNATURE



Don Boyle
Chief Executive Officer


ATTACHMENTS

Confidential Attachment 1 - Licence Agreement Terms and Conditions




Multi-year Agreement with a Consumer Show Client - C                           Page 2 of 2
