F.G. Gardiner Expressway Rehabilitation Project
Dufferin Street to Strachan Avenue (Section 2)
Board of Governors of Exhibition Place Meeting



December 9, 2022
  PROJECT OVERVIEW
• The City of Toronto is proceeding with Section 2 of the F.G. Gardiner Expressway Strategic Rehabilitation Plan from Dufferin to
  Strachan. The project includes replacement of the Superstructure (girders and deck) and rehabilitation of the Sub-structure
  (bents).
• Parsons Inc. (Parsons) is the City’s Owners Engineer & Technical Advisor.
• The project is currently in procurement for a Design-Build contractor. Design-build is a project delivery and management
  approach where the contractor takes on more responsibility for the design phase, as well as more overall accountability. This has
  the potential for a smoother construction process.

• Construction is anticipated to start in Q4
  2023 and is expected to be completed by
  2026.




                                                                                                                                    2
  PROJECT HISTORY
• The F.G. Gardiner Expressway Strategic Rehabilitation Plan was developed by the City of Toronto in 2014 and sets
  the framework for lifecycle renewal of the expressway from Highway 427 to the Don Valley Parkway (DVP).

• In December 2016, Toronto City Council approved the Revised Strategic Rehabilitation Plan which includes the
  use of innovative construction methods to reduce the time and impact of construction (e.g. Accelerated Bridge
  Construction).
• In June 2018, the City’s Public Works and Infrastructure Committee approved the contract award for the first
  project of the rehabilitation plan (Section 1) from Jarvis Street to Cherry Street (now complete).




                                                                                                                  3
  PROJECT HISTORY
• Section 1 of the Rehabilitation Project was recently completed from Jarvis to Cherry Street. Rehabilitation of this
  section of the Gardiner will use a similar accelerated construction approach to the rehabilitation work completed
  for Section 1.
• An update was last provided to the Board on October 9, 2021. This presentation will provide an update on the
  overall project status.

                                                                                  Photo Showing Section 1 Rehabilitation from Jarvis to Cherry




                                                                                                                             Photo Credit: City of Toronto




                                                                                                                                                 4
COORDINATION WITH MULTIPLE PARTIES



                                                                                                              Limits of the Rehabilitation
                                                                                         Exhibition Place     (West Abutment to Bent 35)
                                                                                          Parking Areas
                                                                                         Under Gardiner

                                                                                   Coca-Cola
                                                                                   Coliseum


                                                                     TPS Mounted
                                                                         Unit                               Enercare Centre


                                             Food Building




        Exhibition Place
         Parking Areas



                                                             BMO
                                                             Field
                           Queen Elizabeth
                                Hall

                                                                                                                                             Photo Credit: City of Toronto



                                                                                                                                                                             5
COMPONENTS AND APPROACH TO REHABILITATION
• Work is expected to be       Reference Concept Design
  completed in three key
  phases based on a
  Reference Concept
  Design.
• Initial works will include
  rehabilitation of the
  “bents”, followed by the
  main superstructure                                     Superstructure

  (deck).
                                                           Replacement
                                                            in Stages



• The Design-Build                   Bent
                                  Rehabilitation

  contractor will complete a
  detailed design to
  determine the final design
  details and sequencing of
  construction.

                                                               6
CONSTRUCTION COORDINATION AT EXHIBITION PLACE
• The area around the Gardiner Expressway
  is home to Exhibition Place and is the
  location of over 1200 annual events.
• The City and Parsons continue to work
  collaboratively with Exhibition Place staff
  to assess event requirements and plan for
  staging of the work, including for events
  such as:
    ▪ Honda Indy
    ▪ Canadian National Exhibition (CNE)
    ▪ Royal Agricultural Winter Fair
    ▪ Sporting Events (BMO Field, Coca-Cola
       Coliseum)
    ▪ FIFA Soccer Tournament (in 2026)


                                                Photo Credit: Exhibition Place

                                                                       7
CONSTRUCTION COORDINATION AT EXHIBITION PLACE
• The project team is actively collaborating with the adjacent Metrolinx Ontario Line project to
  coordinate staging of the two projects.




                                                                                                             Limits of the Rehabilitation
                                                                                                             (West Abutment to Bent 35)




                                                      Photo Credit: City of Toronto | Metrolinx (ontario-line-subway-project-breaks-ground-at-exhibition-station-see-the-new-renderings-released)



                                                                                                                                                                                                8
 CONSTRUCTION COORDINATION AT EXHIBITION PLACE
• Lots 857, 858 and a portion of 854 will be utilized for staging (laydown areas) during construction
  activities.
• Pedestrian access at the Exhibition GO station will be maintained during construction with extra space
  provided under the Gardiner during major events.

                                             Exhibition GO Station
                                                Access Routes




                                                                                                        9
 CONSTRUCTION COORDINATION AT EXHIBITION PLACE
• When structural works are underway at the TTC Exhibition Loop for a limited durations, shuttle bus
  services will operate within the TTC Exhibition Loop to continue providing access to the existing station.




                                                                 Shuttle
                                                                  Bus
                                                                 Route




                                                                           Exhibition TTC Loop
                                                     Existing
                                                     Streetcar
                                                      Route




                                                                                                        10
NEXT STEPS
• Continue to coordinate with Exhibition Place prior to and during construction,
  including with adjacent projects such as the Metrolinx Ontario Line.
• Procurement of a “Design-Build” Contractor.
   ▪ An RFP was posted to pre-qualified proponents in October 2022; Bidders have approximately
     8 months to submit their detailed proposal.
   ▪ Proposals will then be evaluated by the City’s Procurement and ECS departments for the best
     solution, based on several criteria, such as the proposed design details and construction
     approach.
• Undertake broader outreach to the Exhibition Place community and general
  public in 2023 prior to construction.
• Proceed to construction, anticipated to start in Q4 2023 and is expected to be
  completed by 2026.


                                                                                                   11
