 ~• toronto                                REPORT FOR ACTION WITH
.,zoo                                    CONFIDENTIAL ATTACHMENT


Construction of Perimeter Fence Project - Request for
Tenders Award

Date: November 14, 2025
To: Board of Management of the Toronto Zoo
From: Director, Capital Program & Sustainability
Wards: All



REASON FOR CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION

The attachment to this report contains a trade secret or scientific, technical, commercial,
or financial information that belongs to the City or local board and has monetary or
potential monetary value.


SUMMARY

This report recommends the award of the Request for Tenders (RFT-42) for the
Construction of the Perimeter Fence Project.


RECOMMENDATIONS

The Director, Capital Program & Sustainability, Toronto Zoo recommends that the
Board of Management of Toronto Zoo:

1. Authorize the Chief Executive Officer or their designate to execute an agreement with
Imperial Fence, Inc. (of Scotland, Ontario) for the award of Request for Tender (RFT) 42
for the construction of a perimeter fence project for up to $1,639,615.00 (excluding
HST), the lowest bid among all four received, on the terms and conditions of RFT-42
and in a form satisfactory to the City Solicitor.

2. Adopt the Confidential Instructions to Staff in Confidential Attachment 1.

3. Authorize the public release of Confidential Attachment 1 following the closing of any
purchase transaction.

Perimeter Fence Project - Construction Tender Award                             Page 1 of 3
FINANCIAL IMPACT

There is no financial impact resulting from the adoption of the recommendations in this
report. The budget for this project is contained within the Grounds & Visitor
Improvements Project of the approved 2025-2034 capital budget.



DECISION HISTORY

There is no prior decision history related to this report.



COMMENTS

The Perimeter Fence Project is an approved 2025 & 2026 Capital project.

The Toronto Zoo is improving its 8.3km chain link perimeter fence that surrounds the
entire Zoo. The new Perimeter Fence Project consists of the following:

1. 2.8 kilometer will remain as is;
2. 3.3 kilometer will be upgraded (extended upwards 1-2ft to a final height of 8ft); and
3. 2.2 kilometer will be brand new fencing.

There will be 2 meter wide clearing on the inside of the perimeter fence and a 1m wide
clearing on the outside of the perimeter fence. Access is required on both sides of the
fence for ongoing maintenance and inspection. The fence is required to be continuous
and a minimum of 2.4 meter (8 foot) high in order to meet the 2025 Accreditation
Standards of the Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA).

The Consulting Engineering firm reviewed the procurement on the Zoo’s behalf and
based on the four submitted bids, found the bid from Imperial Fence Inc. to be the
lowest meeting specifications, and therefore suggested that the Zoo award to Imperial.


CONTACT

Leona Mitchell
Director, Capital Program & Sustainability
lmitchell@torontozoo.ca
416-392-5985


SIGNATURE

Perimeter Fence Project - Construction Tender Award                            Page 2 of 3
Leona Mitchell
Capital Program & Sustainability

ATTACHMENTS

Attachment 1 - Comparison of Request for Tenders Bids

Confidential Attachment 1 - Construction of Perimeter Fence Project - Request for
Tenders Award




Perimeter Fence Project - Construction Tender Award                         Page 3 of 3
