                                            REPORT FOR ACTION WITH
                                          CONFIDENTIAL ATTACHMENT


Red Panda Climate Controlled Viewing - Construction
Tender Award

Date: July 16, 2025
To: Board of Management of the Toronto Zoo
From: Director, Capital Program & Sustainability
Wards: All



REASON FOR CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION

The attachment to this report contains financial information, supplied in confidence to
the Board of Management of the Toronto Zoo, which, if disclosed, could reasonably be
expected to prejudice significantly the competitive position or interfere significantly with
the contractual or other negotiations of a person, group of persons, or organization.


SUMMARY

This report recommends entering into negotiations for the award of the Red Panda
Climate Controlled Viewing Construction Agreement.


RECOMMENDATIONS

The Director, Capital Program & Sustainability recommends that:

1. The Toronto Zoo Board of Management authorize the Director, Capital Program &
Sustainability, or her designate, to negotiate the award and enter into a Construction
Agreement with a qualified construction firm for the Red Panda Climate Controlled
Viewing project at a purchase price as outlined in Confidential Attachment 1.

2. The Toronto Zoo Board of Management authorize the public release of Confidential
Attachment 1 following the closing of any purchase transaction.




Red Panda Project - Construction Tender Award                                      Page 1 of 3
FINANCIAL IMPACT

There is no financial impact resulting from the adoption of the recommendations in this
report.


DECISION HISTORY

On February 7, 2024, Toronto Zoo issued a Consulting Agreement for PO0100644,
Design Consulting and Construction Contract Administration for Red Panda Habitat
Project to Coolearth Architecture Inc. in the amount of $311,252.50, excluding
applicable taxes.

On February 28, 2025, the Board of Management of the Toronto Zoo adopted Item
ZB14.5 - Project Alignment with the Approved 2025 - 2034 Capital Plan and Budget
which included amending Consulting Agreement for RFP38 Design Consulting and
Construction Contract Administration for Red Panda Habitat Exhibit Refurbishment
Project. The revised design value of $585,000 is due to increased project scope
requested by Toronto Zoo.
https://secure.toronto.ca/council/agenda-item.do?item=2025.ZB14.5


COMMENTS

The Red Panda Climate Controlled Viewing is an approved 2025 Capital Project that is
currently out for construction tender. The next scheduled Board meeting is not until
October 15, 2025. To maintain the Project's current schedule of an anticipated July
2026 Grand Opening, the Toronto Zoo is seeking approval from the Toronto Zoo Board
of Management now to negotiate and enter into a Construction Agreement upon tender
closing and review of qualified bids.


CONTACT

Leona Mitchell
Director, Capital Program & Sustainability
lmitchell@torontozoo.ca
416-392-5985


SIGNATURE




Red Panda Project - Construction Tender Award                                  Page 2 of 3
Leona Mitchell
Capital Program & Sustainability

ATTACHMENTS

Confidential Attachment 1 - Red Panda Climate Controlled Viewing - Construction
Tender Award




Red Panda Project - Construction Tender Award                              Page 3 of 3
